Hey, everybody. Welcome to the RStudio live stream. We're going to be covering a few different
things today. Namely, we're going to be going over a lot of R Markdown here from my home
here in Texas. So really excited to be here with everybody today. I'm going to get some
questions in the chat. We'll do a little bit of live coding. I've got a slide deck. I hope
you're going to learn something with me today. And we're going to have fun doing this as
an experiment. This is one of my first times live streaming and first time here on YouTube
live. I've done a little bit on Twitch. So excited to kind of learn along with all of
y'all as we go through this experiment. Let me know if you have any questions and we'll
try to answer some of them in the chat. And at the very end, we'll also upload the video
to YouTube. One of my colleagues is going to be answering questions in the chat as well
and sharing some links as long as we go. So let's get kicked off. I'm going to start sharing
my screen and we'll go from there. Let's do this one. All right. So the first part we're
going to go through, I'm going to have a slide deck. You can find the slide deck if you want to
along with all the corresponding materials at bit.ly slash rmdmarvel. I love this kind of
Captain Marvel movies. They're kind of built the idea around some of that. There's just
some little images and kind of playing around with that idea. So the concept for today is we're
going to go going higher, further, faster with Marvelous R Markdown. R Markdown is amazing. It's
one of my favorite R packages, one of my favorite data products, one of my favorite things for just
doing things in R and other programming languages. I'll also be working inside R
Studio primarily. So you might see me log into R Studio here. I want to be very clear that
everything I'm showing today up until the very, very end of the presentation can be done in R
Studio Desktop or R Studio Server or R Studio Workbench. So there's really not anything here
that's proprietary per se. The vast majority of this is open source R Markdown, which is amazing.
You can be very productive in your school, in your enterprise, as your hobby without really
having to go and buy anything. You do want to go a bit further with R Studio Connect. I'll talk
about that at the very end, but that's a small component of today's presentation. So let me go
ahead and jump into the presentation. The kind of idea here, again, like I mentioned with Captain
Marvel, is every heroine story has kind of three core acts. And just like that, we'll kind of go
through some of that today. Act one is the story about our heroine is set up. Act two, some type
of complication arises that they have to face. And act three is the heroine finds resolution,
defeats the bad guy, wins the day. So for us, we're going to be talking about the tool,
here's our Markdown, here's some problems, and here's some solutions you can do with them.
Basically, some workflows you can use to solve problems with R Markdown.
The way I like to think about R Markdown is that it's a lot more than just, you know,
literate programming, although that's a huge component. R Markdown as a taxonomy can do
many different things. It can be an environment where you're writing code, and writing text,
and creating graphics, and creating statistical models, or data science, or machine learning.
But it can also just be an end result as a data product. You can create something like
this slide deck I'm presenting, which was made with R Markdown. You can use it as a control
document to kind of control your code flow, and how you organize your projects, and bring different
snippets of code together. And lastly, you can also use it for templating. So basically,
leveling up your skills, and taking one thing and turning it into 100. Or taking one example,
and adjusting it, and recreating it without having to rewrite all the code.
So we'll be going into all four of those different taxonomies today.
The first one, and I think the obviously one of the core workflows that you're going to do in
R Markdown, is literate programming. The goal here is that you're going to capture your code,
text, or comments, and your output in a single document. So you have essentially like this
reproducible workflow of capturing your code, along with the output, along with any kind of
comments about what the code is doing, or the outputs that you're seeing, all together. So you
can share one document, or one report with someone if you wanted to do that. But you can also
reproduce it, because you have the source code. The idea of literate programming has been around
for a long time. Donald Knuth has this nice quote about literate programming as a programming
paradigm. And the explanation of it is that it's logic in a natural language, such as English,
interspersed with snippets of macros and traditional source code, from which the
compilable source code can be generated. Now when we think about source code in R,
we have code chunks. So you have these little portions here, where you might recognize some
of these, your favorite ggplot, some dplyr to filter a data set. But then with R Markdown,
you can also intersperse actual text, you know, write about it, just as you would in a word
processor. But now you get the benefit of doing code and text together. The other component I just
want to bring up here is that there is the YAML header, which allows you to define certain metadata.
So up here at the top, you can say, I want my output to be an HTML document. So this will,
when it's rendered, when you finish it and you click render, it will actually create an HTML
object that you can open up in a web browser. And you can switch this out to do
Schrodinger or any other type of things or presentation like I'm doing today.
Now going a step further beyond just that plain text, visual R Markdown was introduced in RStudio
1.4. So this has been around for six or seven months, but there's still lots of people who
may not have heard about it. So I wanted to cover it today. You can essentially think of this as
not only do you have the ability to look at the source code and the raw Markdown, you can also
view it in a way where it shows you the actual rendered outputs. So when you create a table,
it shows you a table. When you include a graphic, it shows you the graphic. You don't just have to
believe that, okay, this code should bring in this image. It will actually do that live inside
RStudio. In addition to that, it can do things with LaTeX or with real-time spell checking or
all the different source code that you still want to be using. And you get a nice header up here
that allows you to add things like bold, italics, cross-throughs, bullet points, tables, all those
things with insertion. But it still allows you to do that with code and actually adds the code into
it. I'll be walking through this in a second here live. So this may seem like, oh, this seems really
cool, but we'll see it here in a second. And then the last part is that R Markdown and literate
programming is not just for R. You can do things like include Python via reticulate. You can use
SQL inside code chunks to actually write raw SQL code. You can include CSS or JavaScript for some
of your front-end development work. And you can include other things for bash, RCPP, SAM, and a
lot of other different languages. So altogether, Knitter provides kind of interfaces to 52 possible
languages. So you can do a lot in R Markdown, even though a lot of what I'll be showing today will be
focused on R. So with that, let's hop over into RStudio. I'm working inside the RStudio team
evaluation. Again, this is not necessary. It's just a reproducible environment I can use.
So I'm actually logged into an RStudio Workbench session. This might look a bit different initially
from what you're used to in using RStudio on, say, your desktop, but the workflows are essentially
identical. Once I log into RStudio, I can hop into there and open up some stuff I was working on
over the past few days and week, and we can go into some live coding of literate programming.
I'm going to be bouncing back and forth between the kind of source document editing I'm doing here
and the live coding and back to the presentation. So stick with me, ask questions if they come up,
and I look forward to kind of learning with you as we go along. So there's a lot going on in here.
So I'm going to close down some objects. But in reality, we're just inside the RStudio environment.
So again, this will work just the same on RStudio desktop as you would inside RStudio Workbench or
Server Pro or Server. The first one I'm going to be doing is the visual editor. So if you, again,
want to go to bit.ly slash rmdmarble, you can actually open up the same files I'm working on.
The first one I'm going to use is this visual RMD file. So this file will look pretty similar
to any R Markdown document you've seen before. There's a YAML header, there's some code chunks,
there's a bunch of text, there's a table here, there's some images, all sorts of things going on.
If I want to switch over into visual editor mode, I can click on the visual editor button
right here. So this button will switch me to the visual Markdown editor. Once I click that,
it'll reload the screen and will then convert what I'm seeing on the page into the actual
represented output. So now rather than, you know, three pound signs and intro, it actually creates
a level three header. All of my links get turned into hyperlinks. My code chunks get a gray
background. I can still, you know, execute them. I can still run tidyverse and load the Palmer
Penguins library. But I don't have kind of all the raw text around it. It will load tables and I can
adjust the size of those tables. So we can resize this table real quick. We can move this over. So
now we have a nice table. So that large represented table that I have here with embedded hyperlinks is
now a visual table. And it's got some included graphics. Basically it's just walking you through
how to use visual R Markdown. And there's a lot of cool things you can do with visual R Markdown.
What might be more useful is like jumping into an actual code example as opposed to kind of a
demo of what visual Markdown does. So if we go to the Penguins folder, we've got a couple
different documents in here. I'm going to start with the Penguin report detail. And again, I'm
back into the plain text version. So you can see it still has loaded some of the graphics. There's
some initial exploration here. And what I want to do is walk through this as a kind of literate
program example. So we're going to move into visual Markdown mode. So again, I'll click the visual
Markdown button. And now we have the formatted text along with my code chunks. We're going to use
a couple libraries. So I'm going to load Tidyverse, Polymer Penguins, Broom, Skimmer, and the Bootstrap
lib package. I've got a couple different documents here talking about what literate programming is,
some initial exploration that we've used for how to use Skimmer, some examples of inline code chunks.
And what we're going to do is do a quick skim of these data. So if you're not familiar with the
Polymer Penguins data set, it's basically a relatively small data set, about 344 rows.
And it includes three different species of penguins for both male and female. This is a
nice alternative to say the iris data set. So you can use it to replace some of that into workflows.
And Skimmer is just showing us what are the different variables in this. So there's a lot
of information about the bill length, basically how long their beak is, as well as the bill depth,
how broad it is. And then their flipper length, or how long their arms are, their body weight,
their body mass, and the year that this was observed. All the data was collected in 2008.
And a big thanks to Allison Horson and Allison Hill for putting together this data set into a
nice R package with a wonderful website. So now with basically three or four lines of code,
is able to get all this metadata about this data set. So there's a little bit of missing data,
the average grouped by species, and bill length, and all the different variables,
the standard deviation, and a histogram of what that data set looks like.
Now you might be saying, well, why didn't I just use dplyr? And you can still do that. So I'm
inside in the visual editor. I can say, OK, we're also going to look at some specific statistics.
We'll split the groups by species and look at which ones are the lightest and which ones have
the shortest flippers. Oh, looks like I made a mistake and RStudio is catching that I misspelled
lightest. So I will correct that. Thank you for the warning there. And now I'll run this code chunk
and we'll now get our dplyr output. So we've grouped by species and sex. We've summarized,
got the weight of the animals, the flipper length of the animals, and we've arranged by descending
weight. So what we observe here is that the Adelaide penguins look to be the lightest,
although there is some NAs in the sex. So some of the missing data there is in the sex column.
And the males are about equivalent to the chinstrap males, but the females are much
lighter than the rest of the other ones. OK, so it looks like the Adelaide are the lightest penguin.
I can continue going through my code and I can filter out the is NAs and I can find some that
actually have this. If I want to make it where there aren't any NAs in the sex,
I can also just change that to eliminate the exclamation point here does the opposite. So it
does find no NAs in the data set. So we've only got about 11 rows of the 340-ish that are
missing data. But let's go ahead and make sure that we're not missing
any animals that are missing body weight. So we'll find the smaller data set.
So I'll kind of go through this. And really, the idea here is that we've got a lot of text.
We've got inner snippets of code. We've got graphics that are going to show up in line.
And we can create even fancier graphics or split it out by specific portions. Nice graphics here.
And then we can find a small linear model between the body mass and the flipper length. There's a
very strong linear relationship between how big the animal is and how long its flippers are.
This might seem silly. We're kind of sticking to a fun data set because I don't want us to
worry too much about what the data is as opposed to the techniques we're using.
Really, what we've done here for a few minutes is just walk through a live coding example. And it's
really just me running code. But you can see that if I gave this to a colleague where I was looking
at this, this is nice to read through. This reads almost like a report already, even though I'm able
to edit it and kind of change things as I go. So, you get this experience of kind of a word editor
or a word processor with the ability to run that code. And that's really what the beauty of
literate programming is, is mixing in the comments or the things you're writing along with the code
you're writing. The other part I want to show, if we go back to the visual editor, is we can also
do this same workflow with reticulate. And I can actually use some Python. So, I'm going to,
again, switch to visual editor mode and just show you that it does still work for Python and in R.
So, we'll load these libraries. I've loaded reticulate to allow me to use Python on the
back end. And then I can import pandas and get the penguins data set into the pandas object now.
If I look at the environment, I have the ability to switch between R and Python and see those
different objects. I'm in the Python environment now and I can see the data set that I brought in.
So, you can see the same one. You'll notice that Python refers to NAs or missing data as man
versus R is going to refer to those as NAs. So, small difference, but it does translate back and
forth nicely. So, let's close that down. And then since I kind of showed you the workflow
of doing this live, let's just knit the document. So, we'll take the reticulate document I have
that has a little bit of Python. It does some data cleaning in pandas as opposed to dplyr.
And we can show the final output here in the browser. So, this is very important penguin
analysis that we're doing here. So, again, we're pulling in pandas. Instead of skimr,
we're using the describe function from pandas and we're looking at a few different things by the
species. This is done in Python. And then we'll do some group by summaries with pandas again. So,
again, grouping by species and sex, getting some outputs, and then showing the data set when we
drop some NAs and filter to just species equal to Adelaide. We can then take that Python object
and pipe it back into ggplot. I'm much more comfortable in ggplot than I am in matplotlib
or other libraries in Python. So, I just moved it back in. But really just the idea of, like,
if you know a little bit of R and know a little bit of Python, you can work with them in the same
document and kind of use that for learning or use it for some of the reporting or other kind of
scientific computing that you're doing. Cool. So, we spent quite a bit of time on
literate programming. We're going to go back into the presentation and talk about our next taxonomy.
Also, take a breath and look at some of the questions that are coming in.
Question number one was, has anyone found a good method of real-time collaboration on R Markdown
in a similar way as Google Docs? That's a great question. Obviously, you could do something that's
more asynchronous by checking into something like version control. So, just as I was saying with
using the code rmdmarvel, if you go to say, like, GitHub, you can literally use the things that I'm
working on and edit those. So, I was just in the visual editor. And then the one I was working on
was the reticulate slash doc. So, now you could add some edits to this. You could pull it in
and work on it. That would be asynchronous. An alternative would be that RStudio Workbench
actually allows you to do live editing of the same document with project sharing.
So, that is a professional product that we offer. But that is an option if you're worried about,
like, collaborating at work and needing to work remotely, but still share documents.
You could also just have a shared drive. Like, if you're talking about Google, you could upload
documents, edit them, and move them back and forth. I still think that version control is
probably the best idea for just, like, being able to comment on something, make edits, and then try
and talk through that process. One other thing, how do you have that many panes? Let's talk about,
go back into this for a second. So, RStudio 1.4 introduced not only the visual editor,
which, again, is this button that allows you to show the kind of rendered output,
it also added support for the multi-panes. So, if I go to tools and go to global options,
pane layout, I can add new source columns. So, you can see I have my four typical panes,
but then I have an additional source column. And if I apply this and click okay,
go back in here and drag this over, I now have the ability to work on a single document in the
middle and also have a more basic report off to the side. So, I can edit, like, two files at the
same time. You're not editing the same file, but two different files. I use this quite a bit for
doing things like Shiny, where you might be writing essentially, like, the front-end portion,
the user interface, and the back-end server component in separate files and bringing them
both in together. So, that's a good option. But let's hop back into the presentation real quick.
So, we talked about literate programming for a while. The next kind of taxonomy of using R
Markdown is the idea of a data product. And here we're using R Markdown to, and using R to generate
a final output for consumption. So, yes, you know, you want to be reproducible. Yes, you want
to include code. But here, you're mostly concerned with I want to create something that I'm going to
give to someone to help them make a decision, convince them, or just report on something. Like,
here's the daily report, or here's a machine learning pipeline I ran with tiny models and
fit all these different parameters, did hyperparameter tuning, and here's the final
model and its fit, but with all the code available. There's a ton of different data
products you can create with R Markdown. You can create reports. So, static HTML reports,
like I was just showing when we rendered that document. PDFs, you can save out so they could,
you know, share them via email or just have something you can have offline. Rich text formats,
GitHub documents, or even Word documents. Presentations, just like this one is. This
one was created in Schrodingen. So, that is a R Markdown package using reveal.js,
or remark.js, I'm sorry. You can create PowerPoint presentations. You can create other,
kind of, more native reveal.js presentations, Beamer for LaTeX. You can create full-blown
dashboards with Flex Dashboard that can be either static or you can integrate Shiny and make them
interactive. Entire websites. So, some of y'all may actually have R Markdown blogs. I personally
use DeCille for my personal blog, and BlogDown is a great option for a lot of power and uses Hugo
on the back end to convert Markdown and R Markdown into complex, sophisticated websites.
You can write books, beautiful books that, you know, people have literally published. You think
of, like, R for Data Science, a book by Hadley Wickham and Garrett Grohlman. That was written
with BookDown. You can actually look at it online in the BookDown format. And lastly, one of the
things I'm really excited about for R Markdown and data products are HTML widgets. You may have
been exposed to DT, or the JavaScript Data Table Library, or Reactable, which is similar, and
creates interactive tables in R that use JavaScript on the back end. So, without even having to use
Shiny or a server, you can have the ability to sort, rearrange, or change the data you're seeing
on the screen all at once. And there's Plotly for graphics, Crosstalk for interaction. We'll dive
into a little bit of that. So, we're going to hop back into the environment here. So, we'll go back
into my Penguin project. I'm, again, going to push this extra pane over because I want to zoom in a
little bit more on this one. And we're going to go into Penguin project and look at data products.
So, the first one we're going to be looking at is, I was talking about different output formats.
So, Distill being the ability to create a web page in R. So, let's close down some of these.
We'll save that. Clean up my environment a little bit. I got a lot going on here, y'all.
So, close this one, close the readme, close down some whiskers, the multi-plot. We've got a lot
of exciting things today, and I don't want to get to them too fast. So, we're going to close down
all these. And then I'm going to pull this one over. This has my Penguin Distill, which, again,
is Penguin-Distill in O2 data products. This may look almost the same as what you were looking at
before with your visual R Markdown. It's essentially the same report or similar,
but when I knit it or render it, that's when it gets turned into the new format.
So, with the Visual Markdown Editor, you still get all this nice formatting,
but when I actually click knit and actually ask R in R Markdown to render it into the new format,
it will render it out as something else. So, in this case, because I have it set as
Distill, so you can see output Distill dash, sorry, Distill colon colon Distill article,
it's going to create an actual Distill article instead of a basic HTML doc.
So, here's Penguin's Distill. This looks quite a bit different. I love that it has this floating
table of contents, that it has some information about when it was published, who the author is.
It's more of like scientific writing native to web. So, this is an HTML document, but it is really
like how to do scientific writing. And again, you still get all the niceties and kind of the
core R Markdown work. So, this is still the same code I was using, but I was able to generate a
different output simply by changing the R Markdown YAML. So, still a lot of the great things, but
it's got really, really nice headers where I can grab this specific link to the modeling section
and share that link, or I can look at my different models that I've chosen at the bottom and where
there are squares at the very bottom here, I can do the wrap up, and it gives me this nice table of
contents where I can jump back and forth between everything. So, I really like Distill. That's a
good option if you're trying to create a personal website or some scientific articles.
So, let's get back into here. I'm going to click on this, drag this one all the way over,
and the next one we're going to do is a Schrodingen presentation. So, again, the data product here
is more of a presentation. So, just like the presentation I'm showing you, this one was
created with R Markdown. I literally wrote a bunch of R Markdown code to generate the presentation
that we're going through. This looks pretty similar to what I was doing before in terms of
it's got really the same code chunks. The specialness here is that instead to kind of tell
this presentation format, this is a new slide, I use three dashes to say go to the next slide,
go to the next slide for each of these different sections. So, each one is a slide break,
but I can still use all of essentially the same code I was using.
Now, this really makes more sense when, again, I render it out. So, if I knit this document or
render the R Markdown into a Schrodingen presentation, I can then open that document,
give me one second to pull it over, and then now we have that same kind of report I was talking
about as a live presentation in a few seconds. So, here's the information we're looking at. Here's
some penguins. We're looking at their bill length, their bill depth, their body mass,
their flipper length, all this fun little data points. We're talking about literate programming.
Here are the specific statistics I'm interested in. So, grouping the data by species and sex and
getting their body weight and their flipper length. I can clean up the data. There were
some NAs, and we dropped all those with NA omit. And now let's get into the plotting section. So,
we're going to show a quick distribution of the data. We'll have the example of the live code up
here, and then we'll show a linear model and a scatter plot. This is, again, the same GD plot
that I had before. I didn't have to adjust anything. And then we'll move on to the modeling
section. So, now we have all of our models I'm fitting. I've got a list of objects of some
different formulas, and then we're going to summarize those into different models,
broom to clean them up. And now I have a nice table with the GT package of what are my different
model formulas I was using. So, looking at flipper length by body mass, the R squared,
the P values, the sigma, the statistics about these. So, obviously, I'm flying through this
portion, but the idea here is that with literally, like, no change to the underlying code, I'm able
to get all of the different things into this object. So, like, get them into a presentation.
Yeah. There's one more example I'm going to go through about data products, and then we're going
to talk a little bit more in the presentation. So, number one, a flex dashboard is a way to create
dashboards in R. What I can do is actually run this document. I'm running the document because
it has a shiny runtime. Shiny is not required for flex dashboard, but does give it a lot of
extra power in terms of now you can have a server component on the back end and execute something.
So, the basic idea of this flex dashboard is it separates different components into portions. So,
I have kind of a tab here for miles per gallon weight, a tab here for miles per gallon cylinders,
and then a table about them. What shiny is doing is giving me linked brushing,
or the ability to select specific objects or observations and then show something different.
So, by using this as a control environment, I'm able to just limit it to specific miles per gallon,
a specific weight combination, or even just one data point. Or I can get a whole section,
zoom in on those, and then adjust both the table and the graphics here. This is done with shiny,
and it's taken literally verbatim from a flex dashboard site. So, you can actually recreate
this or the source code that they share is embedded inside of it. The shiny runtime might,
you know, that's very exciting, but that does require you to manage a shiny server or RStudio
Connect on the back end. So, an alternative, because you're working on R Markdown, is something like
crosstalk. And what crosstalk does is gives you the ability to cross communicate or crosstalk
between different HTML widgets. An HTML widget might be a plotly graphic, or a DT data table,
or a reactable table, or all sorts of different HTML widgets. The idea is that those are using
JavaScript, that you're writing via R, and they can still communicate with each other.
So, there was a question in the chat, does knit mean render or essentially an enter based function?
What knit for render means is take the document, run it from the top to the bottom in a linear
fashion, and create the output format. There's all sorts of side effects that are good in terms
of you could write out different files. The idea is render is like run the entire document and
render the output, or knit the document and render the output. Those are interchangeable. You can use
the RStudio knit button, or if you're doing it from the R console, you could do R Markdown
render, and just pass the file name to it. So, it's not required to use inside RStudio,
but we do provide a knit button for it. So, with that, let's knit the document real quick,
and we will wait for it to render. So, it's going to go through and reading the
lines and pulling in the code, and it's going to generate an output for us to walk through.
While that's rendering, I'm going to look at some of the questions in the chat.
There's a great question about the jobs pane that I want to talk to in a second.
I'm making Markdown usable. Okay. And this one was output to Reactable. So,
let's do that in a web browser. That's not the one. That's exciting, though. Let's do crosstalk
HTML. So, the output that we created was a crosstalk document. Again, this might look
like the exact same plot we've been creating for a little bit while, or for a little while,
flipper length and body mass. So, there's a linear relationship between that.
But the beauty here is that with crosstalk, I have an interactive graphic in terms of this here,
all these little points I'm hovering over, the hover text comes in for free. You get the hover
text in all these different documents. With a table, you have the ability to go paginated or
sort by species, sort by sex, sort by any column. So, you have interactive components,
interactive graphics, interactive tables, all of this available for free and all this
able to be used within your enterprise, within your hobby, within your workspace.
What crosstalk is doing is giving you some of these filters. So, this may look exactly like
Shiny, but there is no Shiny server on the back end. This is all done in the browser
on your local machine. So, I can filter this data set to only show female penguins. So,
now the only sex in the table is female, and all the observations we're seeing up here are
female only. I can show just the males and do the same thing. I can show the males and the females
together. Great. I can filter the body mass to show only the lightest penguins, and we can kind
of see the drop off of the Gentoo as we get to about 4,000 grams. There's not really any Gentoo
penguins that are observed at that body weight. So, again, all of this is happening where I'm
changing things here. It's affecting the plotlographic. It's affecting the table,
and they're communicating together to give you this output.
And again, the beauty of R Markdown and the beauty of crosstalk in this JavaScript library
is you don't have to manage a server. You could literally publish this to GitHub or Netlify or
RStudio Connect or just take the file and literally like deliver it to someone else by email if you
wanted to or by shared drive. They can open it and get this interactivity that you're expecting.
So, all of those amazing things you can do with crosstalk and R Markdown. You can still leverage
Shiny on top of that if you wanted to to get even more power or to actually execute new R code.
You are limited to what these libraries can do in JavaScript, but if you add Shiny,
then anything you can do in R can be added into the object as well.
So, back into here, there was a great question in the chat about the jobs panel, and part of the
idea is that could you execute R Markdown renders as a background job? The jobs panel might be new
to a lot of folks. This is, again, available in the RStudio desktop, the local IDE. It's a free
thing. It's just available. You could render anything R Markdown if you wanted to as a
background job. You would just have an R script that literally contained R Markdown render
and then whatever the R Markdown document you wanted to do. So, you could parallelize some work
if you wanted to, like, you know, render this one. I know it's going to take a while. Also,
render this one, and then that leaves you free to continue using the R console to do other things.
So, these jobs are still executed in your local environment, but behind the scenes, so they don't,
you know, use the same R source that you're using, you do them as a background or an alternative
R environment. So, yeah. So, the jobs panel is amazing. That was also introduced relatively
recently. You can use it. What I use it for a lot is for long-running computation, like
parameter tuning or grid search, where you're going through a lot of different things all at once.
It could take 30 minutes or 45 minutes or even longer in some cases. I don't want to
lose everything, like, lose the ability to do my console for 30 minutes.
So, when I was watching Slice, I was really hoping a lot of people can be using background
jobs so they can continue, like, doing graphics in the R console while the code is fitting in
the back end. That would be a cool example. Let's hop back into the presentation. We talked about
quite a few of these different data products. We've got about 25, 30 minutes left, so I want
to make sure that we get through everything. For the table column width, the basic idea for the
visual editor is when you, you know, bring in a table, create a table that has default widths,
those will adjust to the size of the contents. There are some cases where if you have, like,
really, really long content, it can create a table that you need to adjust,
and you can just drag it over with your mouse to adjust the size of the column.
For Schrodingen and all the colors and layout styles, I highly recommend the Schrodingen
Themer package by Derek and Dewey. That is an amazing package that allows you to write
full themes for Schrodingen, and you can get, you know, beautiful colors and specific,
you know, fonts or CSS embedded in there as well to make it custom.
For GT summary tables in R Markdown, I use GT all the time inside R Markdown. I don't think
there's any known issues with GT summary, but the idea would be is that if you use GT summary
within R Markdown, you can just render it out and get the GT summary in there as well.
A great question here. Are all these features you're showing in RStudio free? Yes. Everything
I'm talking about right now is free. These are open source packages. Some of them are community
based. Some of them are studio based. This is the beauty of open source and our community and the
JavaScript community and the Python community is that all these different components can be
connected together, kind of, you know, revamped or integrated, and you get this amazing power
within free and open source tools. Last question I'll answer here is you could use different
YAMLs. You can, like, render one as a Schrodingen, one as a Distil. The one difference is that
Schrodingen has a very different internal syntax. Those three dashes are going to create new slides
in Schrodingen, but they will create a horizontal line in Distil or R Markdown.
So, while you could have one document literally generate two or five different types of output,
you may have to change some of the skeleton of it, not the code, but the skeleton of, like,
how it presents. And the last one here, when you do render when the document is in Flex Dashboard,
you just render it just as you would with anything else. The difference is if you're using Shiny,
you're actually going to run the document. It essentially treats it as pre-rendered. So,
it renders the Flex Dashboard, then brings in the Shiny component. If you don't have Shiny there,
and you're just doing static or HTML widgets like Crosstalk and Flex Dashboard,
then you can just render it like anything else. So, we've talked quite a bit about all that.
Thank you for kind of sticking with me through a quick run through a bunch of data products.
The next taxonomy I'd like to cover is the idea of a control document. So, this is kind of a step
beyond the classical ones. The first two people have probably done a lot of that. Control documents
are some that I had not done as much of before I'd done some research. So, the goal here is to
modularize your data science tasks and use R Markdown to control your code flow. That seems
kind of clinical in terms of, like, code flow, data science tasks, like, what are we talking
about here? Part of what we're talking about here is, you know, taking something and generating
something new with it. So, parameters in R Markdown can be added to the YAML header with
the params, colon, and then whatever you want the object to be named. So, in this case, like,
species equal to Adelaide. When I render this document, it will run the code in here,
but then it will pull in whatever the parameter is. So, without changing the body code,
I can change what the actual report does. So, I can say, for the Adelaide penguins,
generate this, you know, these different filters and this different graphic. And I can just change
this one line of code in terms of this parameter, and it will generate an entirely new report or
entirely new document that is specific to that. You can have multiple parameters. I'm just showing
the bare bones example of one parameter with one component. You could have five or six different
parameters or more, and you could have multiple different things within that parameter. So,
you could have, like, a string or a vector inside there and kind of run through all the different
ones. The idea is that you're just, without having to change all the code and rewrite ten different
reports, you can generate ten reports just by changing the parameter ten times. So, very powerful.
You can also reference .R files. So, for a lot of folks, you're like, eh, you know, like, R Markdown,
it feels like a lot of, you know, there's a lot of different power there, but, you know, I have to
write all these different things. I'm just going to start in a .R file. You can use and reference
external .R files a couple of different ways. So, you could always just source an internal R file
and just read in things from an external file, but the NIDR read chunk option kind of gives you
the best of both worlds. Here you might see that I have code chunks that are named, in terms of
this is smaller penguins and this is plot penguins, but none of, there's no code in there.
There's nothing in here. And that's because with read chunk, I'm actually able to read in
from a .R file specific chunks. So, this colon, colon, sorry, pound sign, pound sign, and four
dashes essentially creates a chunk label. So, even though I'm inside .R files, R Markdown can
understand this descriptor and say, okay, everything inside here is the smaller penguins chunk.
Everything inside here is the plot dash penguins chunk. So, I can actually write things in a .R
file, reference them in multiple different .R Markdowns. You can imagine I have a shringen,
I have PDF, I have Word doc and HTML, all those could reference .R files so that you're just
writing the components in R Markdown that are specific to R Markdown, like how to create the
presentation. And you can source some of the other more complex code you're writing in R
from the .R file. Just an option, not mandatory, but definitely possible.
The other idea is child documents. So, I could have a core kind of parent document here that is
just an HTML document. It's got a couple library calls in terms of loading Tidyverse and Polymer
Penguins. And then just like before with the read chunk, I have a blank chunk here. There's no code
in it, but it's saying for this chunk, read in the child report, Adelaide report, .R Markdown.
And that will take everything in this. So, the smaller, this code chunk, this text, this code
chunk, and embed it into this portion. So, essentially you wrote all this and put it into
the parent document. Again, the idea of like you're able to build up different components and reuse
parts from different documents into kind of a parent or a core document that you want to
reference that in. So, again, if you're playing around with different output formats, you could
always just, you know, write a document and change the output format. But sometimes you may want to
actually leverage a specific report that gets brought in. This becomes even more powerful if
you think of like conditionally adding a report. So, for my example, it's the same report that we
had before. So, we're bringing in this child report. The parent report now has a conditional
statement. Essentially, if this object is Chinstrap or if it's Adelaide, then bring in this report.
So, that will basically say as long as this means Chinstrap or this means Adelaide, then render the
Adelaide report and bring it in. The better example and the kind of more complex example is if a
criteria is matched. So, if values are above or below a certain value that is concerning, then
bring in all this other code, run it, and generate the kind of worrisome report there that you want
to catch up to. Like, you know, the data is way off from what the norm is. Oh, my gosh, what's
going on? Add all this different thing to check the data quality that you don't necessarily aren't
doing all the time, but you're doing it for here. That being said, please check your data and check
data quality. But just as an example, you can do these kind of if, else, or conditional statements
inside the child document. Another idea of like parent and child documents is Blastula.
Blastula can be used with things like Gmail or you can use it with RStudio Connect to send emails.
The core idea, and there's a bit more code here, we're loading some libraries,
we're creating some graphics, and then we have this render email portion. It will basically take
a Blastula written email. So, you can see that this Penguin email, the output is Blastula,
Blastula email, and render that as an HTML email and then send it. The example I'm using here is
rendering it and sending it via RStudio Connect. You can also render it via SMTP, which is a
protocol that like Gmail uses. So, again, Connect is not required to do this. It's a nice integration,
but you can do this for free with your SMTP style servers. These emails can intrude arbitrary
R output like ggplot or even tables or images of tables. You can basically include a lot of
different things inside an email that you're sending out to your colleagues or to yourself.
I use these a lot for do this thing and then tell me what the output is in a summary.
So, we covered those and most of those kind of, in my mind, the code is covered here in terms of
all we're doing is pulling in code and rendering it. So, I'm not going to go through the live
examples. I did include an entire section inside the Penguin project. So, Control Documents has
Blastula emails, it has emailers, params, external files, using child, using traditional child.
You're welcome to walk through those. Again, at bit.ly, rmdmarvel. But because it's just
rendering the same document over and over, I'm going to spend the next 10 or 15 minutes
talking about our next topic, which is going to be templating. I really love the idea of
templating as well. So, for templating, a lot of people think of like taking one thing and making
it other things or taking one thing and changing something about it to make it different. So, here,
Captain Marvel is working with her friend's child and changing the look of her outfit.
So, that's really cool. You could change, you know, what an R Markdown appearance looks like
with a different theme or different CSS. But more of what we're talking about is don't repeat
yourself, generate input templates or output documents from code. So, if you think about
parameters, that's something we used before was, you know, defining a parameter, setting it as a
species equal to Adelaide, and then we generate this report. Obviously, you could go into the
R Markdown, delete this, type out, you know, chinstrap or Gentoo or one of the other species
and click render, or you could do it from the command line or the R console. So, with R Markdown
render, you can take this report, so the penguin.rmarkdown, and define the parameter as
something else. So, here, a list of species equals to Gentoo instead of Adelaide, and now this will
generate that report with code with that new parameter. So, now you've generated two reports
with the same report, essentially. So, two different outputs from the same input. So,
that's very powerful. A more interesting example in my mind is multi-render, where you actually
take all the different possibilities of the parameter and generate all of them. So, here,
I'm wrapping R Markdown render into my own render function so that I pass in penguin to my render
function. It takes the same report. It replaces the species with whatever the penguin I put in,
and then it creates an output file with the name of that penguin-report-html. So,
now I can find all the distinct penguin species. I can pull that column out, and then I can render
that with per walk. So, basically, it goes through each of the different possibilities and generates
a new report for all of those. So, now I have an Adelaide report, a chinstrap, and a Gentoo report
all from one set of starting code. You can imagine that this could be something like,
I'm changing the year, or changing the month, or changing the day to generate this report data.
Or, for like a modeling task, I'm changing hyperparameters or the different modeling
function or different data set and generating an entire report on it. So, you can do a lot
of different things with parameters and looping through different parameters.
Now, the other idea is rather than generating 10 reports out, you might want to generate
multiple things in one report. So, here, I'm doing something similar, but all within one report.
So, I'm sourcing an external file. This is multi-plot, which is an R function that basically
outputs markdown text. It outputs a plot and prints it, and then adds some blank spacing.
And then I have a loop here. So, this is a code chunk called loop output. I'm using results as is,
so it just pastes the literal output here of what this R code generates. So, it actually
outputs essentially text. I'll take the penguins data set, find the distinct species, pull the
species, and then walk through, again with per, this function three times. What that does is
generate three different versions of the same text and the same graphic, but nuanced or kind
of specific to whatever the input was, whatever the penguin that we're generating was. So, let's
walk through that one real quick. So, we're in templating. I'm going to show a couple things. So,
penguin params. I'm going to pull this over. Again, the species is Adelaide. So, I can
knit this document. Pardon me. Let's let that document render or knit, and then I'm going to
pull it into the browser. So, this is a pretty bare bones report, but you can see 193 are
classified as Adelaide. The distribution of Adelaide penguins are below, and there's a big
chunk of them that are Adelaide. We go in here and change this to the chin strap. Chin strap.
I can, again, knit that report and get the essentially new one out. So, if I refresh this,
it should be chin strap, I think. Let's see if we can, yep. There's chin strap, chin strap,
and now we have 276 penguins instead of 344. So, I can do it that way. I can do it with
knit with parameters. So, if you just click up here on knit and go down to knit with parameters,
it will pull up like a kind of shiny component where I can change this and do
Gen 2. So, now we can knit that to Gen 2. So, it's going to do the same thing and render
a new report for me with Gen 2. So, here's the report we're looking at. Pull it over there.
So, that's possible. A couple different options. You can knit and just change it. You can knit
with parameters, but the more powerful part that I like is the multi-plot or render all.
So, render all is the idea of like rather than manually changing things or going through all
the different options, I can, again, use my render function. If I go up here and get all those,
my render function, here we go. So, this will render the specific documents, but I want to
render all of them together. Again, this is the same thing I showed in the presentation
of here's the templates and penguin params, and then we're going to show the species
equals chinstrap. That's fine. With the penguin names, we're going to pull those out.
What this basically gives us is the three different penguin names, and then we're going
to walk through those with the per walk render function. To just prove to you that that actually
happened, I got some code here to show you that this was run at 3.52, whatever the time is on
the server, on August 26, and it happened about a second later was when they were actually
generated. So, these reports were generated just now, and it gave us the Adelaide report,
the chinstrap report, and the Gentoo report. So, that's super powerful, and I think that's
a really, really cool idea. The loop within a doc R Markdown is also really, really fun.
So, here, this is the one that's using the reports up here in terms of it's going to walk
through the multi-plot that I've already defined, and it's going to create three different outputs
in the same document. So, let's knit that and see what it looks like. When we render this,
it's actually reporting out as is, and then it's going to generate this loop within the doc
HTML. Let's take a look at it. So, for Adelaide, it gives you a level three header,
and it gives you these observations. So, here's 151 observations of Adelaide penguins,
and the flipper length is 190. For Gentoo, it's got a different graphic and different numbers,
and then for chinstrap, a different graphic and different numbers. So, from one dot R file,
you're able to generate multiple outputs within a single document. So, again, a slightly different
idea. The last idea I'll talk about is whisker versus glue. So, the way I like to think about
this is one versus two, if you're thinking about these parameters on the outside of these brackets.
Glue is logic templating in terms of you can take a string, put anything you want with valid
R code inside these brackets, and it will interpret that and execute it inside that context. So,
very, very cool, very strong package. Whisker is logic list templating, meaning you have to define
the object at a time and then pull it in. It also uses two brackets instead of one.
The reason why it's logic list is that it's really thinking of it just as text as opposed
to code up here. So, if you tried to do the same number of row of empty cars, it will just print a
blank there because it can't interpret that, so it just returns blank. Where whisker is very
powerful is the idea of generating actual dot RMD or dot MD files, like basically generating new
input files or text files from an input file. That kind of blew my mind the first time I thought
about it, so let's walk through an example real quick. If I have this report, so this is an actual
R Markdown document, but you can see I've got these double brackets in a few different places,
so the name of the penguin, the name of the species, and some long pros here.
Now, you could think, well, I could just replace this with params,
but the beauty is when you use whisker to fill in this document, which you see on the right,
so Adelaide penguin, Adelaide, and then this long prose about them, it will actually
allow you to still work with the document. It's still a raw dot RMD file, so that's really
powerful and you can continue working with it. So, this is what that function looks like that
I was using, use penguin template, which reads in this file, fills it with whisker, basically
replaces all of the different observations with double brackets with species equal to Adelaide
and this long prose and generates that output. So, let's show that really quick, whisker versus glue.
Sorry, let's do penguin whiskers, use penguin template. All right, so here we're going to
define that function, species, long prose, and we're going to use this use penguin template.
We've now filled the blank template with this really long text string and a bunch of other
stuff, and now we can actually navigate and edit that file inside RStudio. So, now we have an R
markdown document that I can continue adding to. Here is more text, but I've programmatically
filled it with different parameters of interest. So, there's certain times where this is amazingly
powerful, there's certain times where you should probably just use params, but the idea of like,
if you want to be able to continue editing it, like if you're generating a trending document
and you put in all this code and fill in some parameters, but then continue editing the slides,
this could be a really powerful option. So, we've talked about all the different things you can do
inside templating. The last component here, and we've only got a couple of minutes, I think that
was part of the intention, is that all the things I've showed up to this point have literally been
all the amazing things you can do with R markdown for free and within your own kind of choices.
This last component is a bit about R markdown within RStudio Connect. So, RStudio Connect is
a professional product from RStudio. It's a hosting and execution platform for Shiny, R markdown,
Plumber, as well as things like Jupyter, Flask, Dash, and Streamlit for our Python folks.
You can use it to execute or schedule R markdown for basically anything. So, not only can you host
things there, but you can actually have Connect re-render or re-execute this code in the future.
So, you could provide parameterized R markdown where someone can actually go through,
change parameters, and re-render it without having to know anything about R. You could schedule ETL
jobs and pull from SQL with dbplyr, APIs with Hater, or Spark with Sparkly R, and then bring
those into R and do other things with them. Connect provides reports that actually have
logging and history, so you can have multiple versions of the same report over time. You can
schedule some of your long-running training steps that take three hours and have them run at three
in the morning, so that when you come in in the morning at eight, or when you log in your computer,
all that's been done overnight and you've got your batch scoring done and ready for you in the
morning. And then with Blastula that we mentioned earlier, you can actually create and send emails
conditionally or on a schedule. So, here we've got it scheduled for 9.36 a.m. Central Standard Time.
I want this report to run every day, and publish the output and send an email. We'll just, for one
quick second, I'll show you what this looks like. I actually scheduled this report to run every hour
for the past few hours. So, you can see I've got a couple emails here it's been sending me.
So, we've got an actual Blastula email that has an attachment of a PDF, a CSV file, and a PowerPoint
file. All this was generated with R Markdown. It gave me an embedded ggplot, an embedded ggplot,
and an embedded table. And this was run with RStudio Connect over and over and over with different
data and sending me these different parameters. So, this is the power of, like, all these things
you learn are amazingly powerful in your local machine. If you want to go a step further and
have, like, authentication for these documents you're sharing with an enterprise, or scheduling,
or some of these other things that are worth paying for, then you can look in RStudio Connect
and do some of these amazing things. That being said, you can also send emails like this from
Gmail or from an SMTP server, and you don't need RStudio Connect. But what RStudio Connect is
providing is the scheduling, the authentication, the logging, the history, some of those things that
a lot of our enterprise customers are concerned about. So, that was a whirlwind tour. We got it
done in exactly 60 minutes in this fun experiment we did together. So, thank you for tagging along
with me, listening to me talk in my 200 words per minute voice. Thank you to Allison Hill for
defining that. A bunch of different follow-up links. There's some articles that people in the
community have written about how to use R Markdown to be very powerful in your enterprise.
So, Emily Ritterer, Charlotte Gelfand have really great articles on this. I have one covering this
same idea of, like, taxonomy of R Markdown. There's two entire textbooks about R Markdown.
The cookbook for different examples that may answer some of the questions that folks had in
the chat that I didn't get to. And then definitive guidebook, which shows all the possibilities
of what you can do with R Markdown. We also have a few different webinars that people in
the community, again, have showed, like, here's how we're using R Markdown or other things within
our enterprise or within our specific domain. So, maybe you come from the insurance or finance
industry. This report talks about rethinking reporting with automation. Nice video from
the community there. Using R to enhance clinical reporting within the life sciences industry. So,
maybe you come from life sciences or healthcare. This has some clinical data and clinical
applications. And one of my favorites that's a bit more general is avoid dashboard fatigue.
A lot of that is talking about how to go beyond just creating these kind of
dead dashboards and doing things like scheduling, doing things like creating
rich outputs and different ways to engage with your users.
I know that Rob or whoever is working with me in the chat is also going to be dropping
some links to some follow-up material. So, he will be dropping off a kind of summary of everything
that talks about some of the packages that has links out to these other things I talked about.
And if you want to look at the code I used and, you know, riff off of it or adapt off of it or
just play with it by yourself, you can go to my GitHub at github.com slash jthomasmock
slash penguin-project or bit.ly slash rmdmarvel. That's the short code and I will drop that in
the chat again. That will take you, again, to the same page I'm on here with all the code. Oh,
again, to the same page I'm on here with all the code. Oh, and I misspelled it. Apologies.
Bit.ly. So, let's try that again. See if we can get it rolling. There we go. So, my apologies.
Correct link there. And you can have fun with it. And, again, I know that we covered a lot here.
I try to be a bit more motivational with some of these things in terms of, like, here's the
things you can do and then giving you examples to build off of. I find the way that I learn the best
is from these projects or doing project-based learning where I can take something that I know
is working in a minimal way and expand it to be useful for me in my job. Do something in a
different way that is useful or a new way that I wasn't able to do it before. So, go out, have fun
with our Markdown. You have all this amazing power available to you for free that you can rip
off and change. So, go out there, use it, and have a good time. I'll stick around for a little bit
and try to answer some more questions as they come in. But that is the end of the core presentation
itself. And thank you for tagging along. We are doing this as an experiment. So, if you could
take some time and actually go through and fill out the Google form that was just dropped in the
chat, please do that. That will help us understand, like, what other types of things y'all
would like to see in the future, where we can make improvements, where I kind of slipped up, or
where kind of things could be better. So, thank you all for attending. Thank you for your time
today. And everything was fantastic, I think. So, thanks for your time. I'll try and answer a few
of these different questions. Also, for anyone that's still here, this is Howard. This is the
bonus Howard slide. It's almost the end of summer here in Texas. Not really, but this is my dog,
Howard, who loves watermelon. So, that's something to take home and run with and have a good time
with. Let's do some of these questions. I think I answered the one about R Markdown Render and
Flex Dashboard. But again, if you're using a static Flex Dashboard, you can just R Markdown
Render it just as you would like. If you have a Shiny component, you will then run the document
as a Shiny app, because you have to have that server component.
For parameters, how can we get a list of options with an API endpoint?
That's really interesting. I assume that you could pull in something if you had like
an API, and you were pulling in data with, say, like the HTTR package, and you could pull that in.
I'd have to think about using API as a way to generate parameters, and I don't want to kind
of speak off topic. So, I'll try and do something in a follow-up blog post for that, and we'll
release that. Is there a good way to output a specified set of dashboard views to a PDF?
So, you can use the WebShot package. I didn't have enough time to talk about that today,
but the WebShot package allows you to take screenshots of HTML and then embed them somewhere
else. So, you can imagine that HTML is amazing. HTML is what I think you should be creating,
because you can do so many different things with it and make it interactive.
But sometimes people are like, I need a PDF, or I don't have internet access. I need to have this,
or I want to print it out. A couple different use cases. With a PDF, you could actually do
WebShot and print different HTML views, like a Flex dashboard, to a PDF. There is a blog post
that we have in our studio, our studio blog, WebShot, that covers that. Let me see if I can
find the link, and WebShot 2. So, this package for printing HTML, this is a really powerful package
for doing all sorts of great things, like basically just taking screenshots. So, here is a
screenshot of the CRAN and the R statistical project homepage, from R 4.1 and the base R
pipe, so pretty exciting stuff, and just being able to take images of that. So, you can basically
pass any HTML into that. It doesn't have to be a web page. It could be locally generated HTML as
well. Can you ask Knitter to read several .R files? Absolutely. So, you could either source
or Knitter read chunk from multiple times. So, you can imagine I have 10 different .R files.
You could read all those into a parent R Markdown document and execute the code there.
What are the best practices to produce Word documents from R Markdown? Let's go back here.
So, for Word documents from R Markdown, there's kind of two ways of doing it. You can do it with
R Markdown proper, and there's also what's called the Office First,
that is a really powerful environment for just working with Office things. You can imagine
PowerPoint, Excel, and Word, like the kind of Microsoft Office stack. You can do a lot of
those different things with R and with R Markdown. There are certain limitations or certain things
you have to work harder to do, but I think that you can still generate useful things from R
Markdown into Word to do those. When do you think someone should use R scripts over R Markdown
files? I try and almost always use R Markdown files if I'm doing anything that is useful for
that. So, anything where I'm creating an output or I'm trying to capture my train of thought.
I know there are times where folks are like, well, I have to send a .R file out to a high
performance computing cluster. That's fine. You can use a .R file, and you can still do
useful workflows where if I'm in a .R file, I can create like a section label or something. So,
with command shift R, I can do cool label, and this will put a separator there where I'm doing
labels, or I can do pound pound four dashes to also create a section label. What this does is
not only you're writing comments about what you're doing, but if you do want to bring these into R
Markdown in the future, now you can use code chunk and read code chunk to pull those in
usefully into an R Markdown file. That being said, I find that working R Markdown,
especially with the visual editor, so the ability to not only just see the raw plain text or work
with the plain text, but also have the rendered output and the ability to interject all sorts of
different things that can insert a level one heading. The amazing things you can do with R
Studio and R Markdown are worth it, although .R files can do the exact same with R functions.
Does Blastula run inside a Docker container on a virtual Linux server? Does it have limitations
on the size of the email attachment? So, Blastula, like anything else, could run inside a Docker
environment. The way that Blastula works is either you locally generate an HTML file
and send it via SMPP, so I actually render an actual email and then send it via Gmail, for
example, or I use RStudio Connect to render it on a server somewhere. RStudio Connect doesn't
require Kubernetes or doesn't require Docker. It just runs on a traditional bare metal server,
like on-premise or a virtual cloud environment, so you don't need Docker in that workflow.
If you wanted to use Docker with Blastula, you could, but there's no requirement to do that.
Limitations on the size of the email? I do think that the size of the email is more limited by
your server client for sending emails or your web client. I know that, for example,
I think Gmail has a size limit on images, so if you try and send a gigabyte of data via email,
Gmail's just not going to let you do that. That's not a Blastula thing, that's just a Gmail thing.
But you can attach basically anything you can create in R, you can attach from email, so PDFs,
Excel files, CSVs, RDS files, images, entire reports or .html files, those can all be attached.
Things that are in line in Blastula, and I think we actually have a control document,
I can show this, we're way over, but we're just going to have fun with that. Let's look at a
Blastula email. That's not the one I wanted. Penguin emailer. There we go. So when I actually
render the email, this is a preview that you can run with the package. This has not been sent,
but it shows you what the email would look like as a preview. So this is an embedded ggplot,
it's literally inline, so in your actual email that you send to someone, it'll have this text
and it will have this image. However, some clients are very aggressive with stripping HTML.
So if you tried to, say, do a table with GT, that might not render exactly as you want. Not
because GT is doing anything wrong, but just because your email client can't parse HTML at that
complexity. So what you can do instead is attach an image directly, and that will typically work
in any of the clients. The one addendum there, though, is that attaching tables as images does
remove all the metadata of a table and essentially makes it an image, like a graphic. So it might be
better to attach a report and just say, like, here are some quick summaries there. But for a
lot of email clients, you can still embed tables within them. All right, I think that's actually
all of it. We still have around 400 people here, so thank you for spending some time with me and
going a bit over. Have a wonderful weekend, be safe, you know, enjoy our markdown, have a good
time, and we will see you next time. Tom logging off, closing down a lot of things, and have a good one.